From: MR. JERRY ADAMS [jerryadams5@email.com]
Sent: Tue, Sep 24, 2002 5:28 AM
To:
Subject: BUSINESS PROPOSAL.

Mr. Jerry Adams 
Tel:234-8033302203 
Federal Airport Authority 
of Nigeria (FAAN) 
Ikeja - Nigeria 
 
Dear Sir, 
I hope this message will reach you in the best of health and 
eceive your prompt attention, even as we have not had any previous 
correspondence before. Kindly reach me immediately for details should 
you agree to its contents. 
 
I am a principal accountant and the Chairman of the Federal 
Tenders Board Committee to the Federal Airport Authority of Nigeria 
(FAAN). This message isto solicit for your kindness in assisting me to
transfer some 
amount of fund from my country to your country. 

The total amount of fund is US$29.5Million (twenty nine million, 
five hundred thousand United States Dollars)which resulted from 
various contracts 
awarded by my ministry to some foreign firms in which the 
contract bills were slightly inflated by us members of the Tenders 
Board Committee with the sole 
aim of having the excess fund for our subsequent use. 
 
Presently, all the foreign firms that executed the projects 
concerned have been paid their bills accordingly and the projects 
have been commissioned for use. At this juncture, we now want to 
claim and transfer the excess fund using a foreign company since 
foreign contractors originally executed the contracts. Also, we as 
civil servants are not allowed to operate domiciliary nor foreign 
account, therefore, we cannot claim this fund locally, hence the 
necessity for this contact with you. 
 
We have decided to embark on this transaction now that we have 
new civilian administration. Our aim is to present your name as a 
true beneficiary of the fund. 
 
The total fund (US$29.5M) will then be remitted into any 
designated bank account as shall be recommended by you. The relevant 
authorities will be made to believe that your company executed some
contracts for my ministry to 
which payment is due to be effected. 
 
In this regard therefore, you will be required to present a 
suitable bank account that will accommodate the total amount of fund. 
The moment the bank account details are received from you, it will
only take
a maximum 
duration of 7-9working days to have all documentations complied and 
the fund remitted to your account. 
 
On completion of this transaction, we have resolved to give you 
25% of the fund for your efforts and assistance rendered; 5% will be 
used to settle any expenses that might be incurred on the process of 
this transaction both from our end and your end while the remaining 
70% will be for us. 
 
I will be disposed to giving the details of this proposal as soon as I
receive your confirmation signifying your 
interest in this proposal and your willingness to assist in its
realization.

 
Kindly reach me through the above email address or below stated 
Telephone or fax number for more details on how we shall commence the 
whole transaction. 

Permit me to stress the confidential nature of this transaction 
and does not matter any particular field of trade to prosecute this 
transaction. Above all, let trust and honesty be our watchword 
throughout this business. 

Awaiting your kind response. 

Yours faithfully, 
Mr. Jerry Adams 


